# [Git](https://git-scm.com/): [the information manager from hell](https://git-scm.com/docs/git.html#_name)

[Git](https://youtu.be/7cqHtGb9WYM?t=80) is a version control system that can be used to track development progress on a project. Its utility ranges from pure curiosity (when and by whom certain code, etc. was created/edited), through collaboration (merging the simultaneous work of multiple authors) and disaster prevention and/or mitigation (code review, reverting, and patching), back to semantic information about the project (releases).

---

> [!NOTE]
> Git is easiest to use with a [graphical user interface](https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis) like [GitKraken](https://www.gitkraken.com/), [GitLens](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=eamodio.gitlens) for VSCode, or [IntelliJ's Git integration](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/using-git-integration.html). The latter is my favourite: I'm a way "better" gitter for it. Below, I'll describe the main Git operations without too much attention to command-line syntax, mainly for the benefit of terminology and the occasional simple use on a remote machine, assuming nobody would have one as their main development environment lest they be relying on a good IDE. The reader is encouraged to browse the documentation at [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/docs) and the numerous blog posts online that illustrate the concepts discussed here in more detail.

> [!NOTE]
> Are you a Gen Z-er who wants to learn Git *and* have heaps of harmless fun at the same time? Check out [Oh My Git!](https://ohmygit.org/)

---

### Initting

To start "tracking a folder" (and the whole *worktree* within it) with Git, run
```shell
git init
```
in it. This won't do anything noticeable, except create a (hidden) `.git` directory. Alternatively, you can
```shell
git clone URL
```
a project that already exists online.

### Committing

The main operation in Git is
```shell
git commit -m "MESSAGE"
```
This will irreversibly[^force] record the state of the project[^stage] to the Git repository in a commit object, identified by a *hash*: a sensitive encoding of the commit's contents, which consist of the changed files, reference(s) to the parent commit(s), the author, time, and supplied `MESSAGE`. The hash is used as the "name" of the commit and can usually be uniquely shortened to the first eight or so characters.


[^force]: Nothing is irreversible, and commits can be overwritten, but this is strongly discouraged. We'll demonstrate this by the end of the lecture.

[^stage]: A detail that you shouldn't need to worry about if using a Git GUI (or at all, why does it even exist?! See the end of [this answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/54812022/7185647).) is Git's *staging area* / *index*: an intermediary where files need to be `git add`ed before being commited. In a GUI, you can select which of the changed files—or even which edits within them—to add to a commit.

#### `HEAD`, branches, and other pointers

Commits, keeping references to their parent(s), form the *commit tree*: the source of all truth about the version history of a project. For convenience, Git also includes several "pointers" to commits. The most prominent one is `HEAD`, which simply refers to the "current" commit, which is usually the latest one created.[^detached]

On the other hand, *tags* are simple pointers intended to permanently refer to a given commit (i.e. state of the project) and are often used to denote milestones or releases.

`HEAD` (usually)[^detached] carries around with it the "current" *branch*: a fancy name for another kind of pointer-to-commit, intended to "spearhead" the growth of the commit tree in many simultaneous directions, *branching* out from the `main` development path. Coincidentally, the default branch in recent times is called `main` and usually represents a "presentable" version of the project. Meanwhile, developers should
```shell
git checkout
```
new branches to work on new features, bug fixes, etc. and then [merge](#merging) their work into the `main` branch (but see GitHub's pull requests, which allow code moderation (and editing) before changes are accepted/merged).

### Remotes

> [!NOTE]
> The remote and its branches are automatically set up when `git clone`ing it. But if you `git init`ted a new repo instead, you can still
> ```shell
> git remote add REMOTE_NAME REMOTE_URL
> ```
> later ("`origin`" is usually chosen for `REMOTE_NAME`).
>
> If your local branch has not yet been set to track a remote one, this can be stipulated by
> ```shell
> git branch --set-upstream-to=REMOTE_NAME/REMOTE_BRANCH LOCAL_BRANCH
> ```

Local branches can be associated with remote counterparts, and these can be synchronised by
```shell
git push
```
ing local changes to the remote repository and
```shell
git pull
```
ing changes from the remote. Note that these commands may often fail! if the commit trees have "diverged" (branched out inadvertently, e.g. if someone else has contributed to the remote). In that case, one needs to first
```shell
git fetch
```
the remote repository (remote copy of the commit tree) and then

[^detached]: `HEAD` *can* be made to point to older commits, in which case `git commit`ting again leads to the so-called ["detached HEAD" state](https://kodekloud.com/blog/git-detached-head/) (don't worry, it's not dangerous, if you know what you're doing)).

### Merging

```shell
git merge
```
is probably the most daunting of the Git operations. However, it's in essence simply a record that a commit "came from" multiple parents; but its contents are still the *final* result of the merge operation, i.e. the file(s) in their final state. While, in the past, merging files on the command line might have been a pain, modern GUI tools can help you compare the different input versions and effortlessly combine them.

## A visual cheatsheet
[Here](https://ndpsoftware.com/git-cheatsheet.html) you can find a very-well done visual cheatsheet showing the main git commands and the way they interact with the index, the workspace, the local repository, and more.

## Bonus: modifying commit history

In fact, the majority of mergers can be performed without `git merge`. An annoyingly common example is when someone pushes unrelated functionality to the upstream (remote) branch while you're working on your local copy, and now your push is rejected because you need to account for the new commits. Can't we simply "pretend" we started working *after* the other person pushed their changes? Yes! Yes, we can:
```shell
git rebase
```
Rebasing "moves" (reapplies) a collection of commits "on top of" a given point in the commit history, taking care to not repeat any changes that might already exist. Since this is getting into advanced territory, the reader is refered to [the excellent docs](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase) and the in-class demonstration.

But what if you \*gasp\* make a mistake and *then commit it*?! Well, noticing your mistake is a good start, and you can always
```shell
git revert COMMIT
```
regardless of how long (how many commits) ago the mistake happened. However, this will actually make a new commit that explicitly undoes your mistake, making it doubly evident. What if you're ashamed and want to hide it, i.e. remove the offending commit from history and overwrite it with something which you hope is not a mistake?

If would like to edit the last commit, i.e. the one `HEAD` points to, you can do
```shell
git commit --fixup | --amend
```
There are versions that allow you to just edit the commit message or just the commit contents: check out [the docs](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit#Documentation/git-commit.txt---fixupamendrewordltcommitgt), [the other docs](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit#Documentation/git-commit.txt---amend), [this guide](https://jordanelver.co.uk/blog/2020/06/04/fixing-commits-with-git-commit-fixup-and-git-rebase-autosquash/), and your GUI!

In more complicated situations—when the commit to be modified already parented new changes—one can use the powerful
```shell
git rebase --interactive
```
to rewrite a series of commits. This will
1. Rewind time to the first commit to be edited, undoing (but still remembering) all newer changes in the worktree (files on disk).
2. Let you make new changes at that point in history and commit them (`--ammend`) on top of the existing commit.
3. Advance time by one commit, applying it on top of the newly edited files.
4. Pause again and goto 2. until the whole history is repeated (with possible modifications).

In the process of interactive `git rebase`ing, code conflicts might arise, which have to be resolved as if merging (but no merge commits will be made). In any case, GUIs make all this really easy, as we'll demonstrate in class.

Again, `git rebase` creates new commits, so if the old ones have already been pushed, conflicts will arise when pushing again. The civilised way of proceding is to `git merge` the (remote) old version of the branch and the edited one in a new commit, but what's the point of that?! Instead, if allowed by the remote branch protection rules, you can
```shell
git push --force
```
but this is not too collegeal (what if your collaborators already pulled your mistakes into their local repos?!). If you don't have colleagues though and know what you're doing, `git push --force` away!

## Bonus: (taking the) blame

What if it wasn't you who made the mistake?
```shell
git blame
```
can tell you who did (or, in general, which commit each fragment of code came from). This can also be useful when reviewing the code of libraries you use, which suddenly break, in order to find out when the breaking change was introduced and revert to a time before that. Again, GUIs and GitHub's online code browser can clearly annotate files with `git blame`.


# GitHub: where the world builds software[^motto]

[^motto]: Way better than their new motto "Let's build from here" but also, I guess, way more persecutable.

I suggest using [GitHub](https://github.com/) for all your remote Git need: it made $1 billion profit in 2022, so it must be good (it's completely free to use in ordinary circumstances).

Beyond *storing*[^GHforce] all the commits you've `git push`ed, GitHub can [visualise them](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/viewing-activity-and-data-for-your-repository/understanding-connections-between-repositories#viewing-a-repositorys-network) in all their interconnectedness, measure your [pulse](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/viewing-activity-and-data-for-your-repository/using-pulse-to-view-a-summary-of-repository-activity) (activity in software development), automatically deploy your repositories to continuous integration (see lecture on Testing) and documentation (see lecture on Documentation) tools, and help you interact with your users. That last part comes in two flavours: 

[^GHforce]: Here's a tip: by default, `git push --force`ing rewritten history is disabled for obvious reasons, but a GitHub repo owner/administrator can enable this on a per-branch basis from the repo's Setting → Branches → Add branch *protection* (lol) rule → Allow force pushes. Use this with caution.

### User feedback: GitHub issues and pull requests

#### Issues

GitHub allows *everyone* to express their issues with your code.[^democracy]

> [!NOTE]
> Not all "issues" are bad. For example, PyTorch has, [among others](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/new/choose), issue templates for a "Bug report" (bad) but also for a "Feature request" (demanding). 

GitHub's [Issues](https://github.com/features/issues) are full of features—e.g. labels, to-do lists, cross-references, templates—most of which are relevant only to large projects with numerous on-boarded developers. However, it won't hurt if you yourself use GitHub's issues to keep track of what's wrong and what can be improved in your software.  

[^democracy]: In fact, having and advertising a means for receiving user feedback is a [requirement](https://joss.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submitting.html#submission-requirements) for publishing papers about open source software in the [Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/). Conversely, you can express *your* issues with anyone's public code! Use democracy [wisely](https://github.com/openjournals/joss-reviews/issues/1277#issuecomment-667670005).

#### Pull requests

Sometimes a user (could be you) already has a solution in mind for some issue[^pull-issue] (e.g. how to fix a bug or implement a feature). In that case, they can ask politely that the owner/administrator of the repo incorporate their code into the software.

A pull request is just that: a request that a given branch (can be a temporary one created specificcally to work on a bug/feature) be `git pull`ed into the `main` branch. GitHub offers [many features](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests) related to pull requests, e.g. the ability to comment on particular changes, accept them one by one and/or modify the implementation (by pushing further commits on the source branch (even interactively from the web interface itself)).

[^pull-issue]: The issue need not have been officially raised; but if it has been, it can be linked to a pull request and automatically resolved when the pull request is satisfied.

##### [Forks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork)

OK, but what if you want to contribute to a repository you don't own/administer: e.g. you implemented a fancy new CUDA kernel for a special function, and you want it included in PyTorch? In this case, you can [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo) the "upstream" repository, creating a "clone" (but not  really a `git clone`!) of the original repo that GitHub can help you [keep in sync](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/syncing-a-fork) but is otherwise yours to modify in any way! You can develop on top of it, and when you're ready, create a pull request back to the original repo.

### User feedforward: Public Releases

The other mode of communication between developer and user base is for the developer to act on the issues and feature requests (and maybe add features on their own initiative), accept contributions by pulling pull requests, and finally release a new version of the software. To this, [we dedicate the whole next lecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cliffhanger).